# welovemaps_project: Income and Racial shifts in Minnesota

### Abstract
This project focuses on exploring the trends in personal income of Minnesotans from the year 2012 to 2022, along with shifts in the racial makup of the population. The files used in this project are all in the "[welovemaps_shiny](https://github.com/yospepin/welovemaps_project/tree/main/code/welovemaps_shiny)" folder in the "[code](https://github.com/yospepin/welovemaps_project/tree/main/code)" folder of this repository. The county level datasets came Bureau of Economic Analysis, US Department of Commerce website. More about them in [Milestone1](https://github.com/yospepin/welovemaps_project/tree/main/planning). The code used in cleaning these datasets to create the ones we used in the project canbe found in the [data_cleaning]() folder. The final product of this project is a shiny app displaying racial and income make ups of Minnesota on both county and track level, and can be found in the [welovemaps_shiny](https://github.com/yospepin/welovemaps_project/tree/main/code/welovemaps_shiny) folder, or on the link in this Read Me.

## Introduction
Our main research question for this project is "How do shifts in racial and ethnic population demographics correlate with income changes across Minnesota counties over the past decade?". Through this project, we tried to explore how economic gaps among racial and ethnic groups might affect income levels and access to economic opportunities, and by doing so, highlight any economic challenges faced by diverse communities, and provide insights for policies that promote inclusion and equity.

## Shiny output
The final results of our exploration is a shiny app, which displays maps and graphs for different Minnesota Counties and can be accessed online through this link: [shiny](https://irisfokamsi.shinyapps.io/welovemaps_shiny/). The first tab, named "Introduction", contains an animated GIF which changes color as time goes by, and reveals how the per capita income in each county is changing, the second tab, "County-level analysis", contains a county level map of Minnesota, which reveals income and racial changes over the years for a county after it is clicked on. A marker will appear to indicated which county is being viewed. There is also a slider on this tab which helps visualize the income changes of the GIF at a chosen pace. The third tab, "tract level analysis" behaves as the second tab, but provides this information about track in the county. The "income trend plot" shows the changes in per capita income for all counties from 2012 to 2022, whith each county represented by a grey line, and the selected county highlighted in blue. The "racial makeup trend" plot shows changes in population within the different races displayed, since 2012, for the selected county.

## Conclusions
When working on this project, we realized that the best conclusions that could be made were mainly observational ones, and not inferences of causation in the data, based on the data we were using. Our data does not have instances of interaction between race and income, so every observation can only be described individually and seperated from others. Among many, we found the following:
- There is a relatively bigger jump in income for Minnesotan counties from the year 2019 to 2020, which can be seen on from the moving GIF at these years or by moving the slider on the first tab. This sudden change could be in response to a gain in stability after the events of COVID-19, as economic activities quickly took a positive turn when the situation died down.
- The degree to which the racial composition of counties with higher per capita income changes is relatively lower than that of the low per capita income counties, and this can be seen on less fluctuation in the different lines for each race on the "racial makeup trend" plot. This could suggest that these counties are more stable in terms of people moving in and out, and most people who move it are able to do quite well for themselve and so decide to stay, hence making the line on the plot be more consistent with an increase than a drease, making it more uniform with ledd fluctuations.
- Overall, there as been an increase in per capita income since 2012, but the graph shows a drop from 2021 to 2022. This might have been due to a tightening monetary policy and surging inflation in that period. The Federal Reserve raised benchmark interest rates multiple times in 2022, which might have affected budgets and decreased disposable income. As for racial makeup over all, there was a general trend on an increase in population, though some counties experienced a drop in a certain population such as Renville county which experienced a slight drop in its Asian population.

There are many areas of for improvement and further research in this projec, two of which include looking into income changes within the different race, to get an understanding of how this might  have affected the population changes of that group in certain areas, and a dive into other factors that may influence income changes such as job availability and, also observing the different areas in which income grew leading to growth in per capita income, to help get a bette sense of what accounts for the income changes and how this might be integrated in policy making to help calm down any severe income disparities.

### Ethical considerations we bear in mind
- The data collected by the census is anonymous, and so pretects the identity and privacy of the responders in our datasets.
- Throughout the porject, we aimed at not targetting any group in anyway, but provide a bias-free and overall report of our observations.
- We recognise that census data may contain errors, and misrepresent certain groups of people, and so we keep an open mind in describing our observations.

### Shiny app Link
[shiny](https://irisfokamsi.shinyapps.io/welovemaps_shiny/)

